and um i'm going to hand over to our
speaker for this evening
brian lester and brian is going to talk
all about
galaxies and the milky way so over to
you brian
thank you and thank you for joining
and just open things up
right
right the stars we see in the evening
sky
are the stars of our galaxy
but if you want to see the milky way
the band of stars you need pretty good
skies
the best i've ever seen it was in
the isle of wight i was well away from
the street lights
and the band of the milky way was so
bright i could see it right down to the
horizon i could even see a tree
silhouetted against it um that's that's
certainly the best i've ever seen
it and it did bring other problems it
was so
dark that night i couldn't recognize the
constellations there were too many
blooming stars
even i couldn't even find the plow so
there is a disadvantage to
really good skies you can't find your
way about
the streak on that uh photograph is just
a satellite that appeared
during the exposure but the milky way
band of stars is is moderately faint
and because of light pollution many
youngsters are growing up
never having seen the milky way
but cameras are marvelous nowadays and
can take
uh superb images in very short
exposure times and uh you can see
the band of milky way the milky way
rising up in the picture and the
center of our galaxy is just above the
horizon
and it's a very similar orientation to
the
edge on galaxy uh we can see on the
right
uh we're looking at the spiral arms edge
on
but you'll notice with the galaxy that
it's
lit one side which means we're not
exactly edge onto the the galaxy
we're slightly offset and if you look at
the
milky way you'll see the left hand side
is lit up as well
and that means that we're not in the
plane
of the spiral arms we're above
the plane we're about 50 light years
above the plane
of the milky way
now we just have a recap on the
hertzfund russell diagram which i
covered a couple of weeks ago
and we can see
this band of stars here is known as the
main
sequence this is where most stars spend
their lives
to fusing hydrogen
into helium and as that as they go up
they get bigger until we get to uh
giant stars here and this is the
relationship
between star brightness and the
temperature
so hot stars are this side
cool stars are this side
dim stars are down the bottom
bright stars along the top
and all these are the main sequence
and the only ones that aren't are where
the stars have started to run
out of nuclear fuel and they've turned
into red and orange
yellow giants so these stars here
are dying and of course they have to
give them
uh categorize them and so
o and b stars are the blue
stars the really uh hot stars
and some of them are monsters as you can
see
and then as we come down we come to a f
g g is a the same type
as the sun the sun is a g-type star
and these these are all dwarf stars and
then coming down to here we come on to
k-type stars m type stars
but you can have an m giant
as well as an m red dwarf
so these are this is just the the
response of the color
so how many stars have we got in the
milky way well
each of these squares represents a
billion stars in the milky way
and you can see here's the categories
again
so we can see that most of the
stars in our galaxy are red stars
then followed by orange stars
yellowy stars coming onto white stars
and
the least popular of all the stars
is the very hot o and b stars
and this is all the giant stars
so you've of this uh m-type stars that
make up all of this lot
there's only this many um red giants and
then you've got orange giants and
yellow giants and things so it just
shows you how many stars there are
and how most of them are dwarfs
now the colours of stars when you look
through a telescope
aren't that dramatic they're more just
gentle hues
but one particular star i like
is alberio which has the yellow star
against the blue star and the
contrasting
colors makes a grand sight in the
telescope
so how many stars are there in the milky
way
well let's count them let's get a large
each of you get a large bag of rice
and i want you to count the rice in a
one kilogram
bag of and let
one grade of rice represent
one star in our milky way
and when you've done that i want you to
count some more
i want all
25 of you to count
10 bags of rice
and then i want you to come back
tomorrow and count another 10 bags of
rice
and carry on for the rest of the week
for the rest of the month
for the rest of the year every day
counting 10 bags of rice
you don't get a day off on christmas day
and then keep doing that for 44
years and that's how many stars
there are in the milky way
i won't say the number because it's
meaningless it's just so
vast it doesn't mean anything and just
in case you're wondering
you'll need 60 lorries to transport that
amount of rice
now if we go back to our stars in the
night sky
so you've probably guessed that most of
them
are giant stars so if i
label all the naked eye stars up
you can see that the o and b's are
classed as giant stars and then these
are only main sequence stars it doesn't
show the red giants or the orange giants
and then a f g k
and m are all dwarf stars
so let's get rid of the giant stars even
though there's not very many of them
in the in the in in the um
milky way so the most popular star we
see
in the milky way is the a type stars
we'll see one or two f stars but these
are all dwarf stars
so that's uh that's how we ma most of
the stars you see in
in the night sky are the just the
brighter ones
so you don't see any red dwarfs
in the night sky even though they make
up 75 percent
of the milky way they're just too faint
you can
see some in binoculars but they're
generally just
too far too faint to be seen
and what's the average distance between
the stars in the milky way
i just it's about approximately four
light years is the average distance
and i think many of you know that the
average the
the distance to the uh alpha centauri
system
is about that distance so that's an
average distance to this
to the stars and so
could we go there
well i i reckon we could use a couple of
a satin
five they've got a couple left in
museums i'm sure if they were to
wipe them down with an oily rag and
charge up the batteries
you'd be able to use them again because
once when they went to the moon they
cruised along at uh
30 times the speed of sound
um we know the engines still work
because a few years ago
this despite one of the these engines
being
50 years old nearly it still worked
and 30 times the speed of sound it would
just
take five months to get to the sun
so how long would you get
take to get to the alpha centauri system
well shall we say that columbus
instead of heading westwards and looking
for the east indies
had a change of plan and decided to
head for alpha centauri
and for over 500 years he would have
been traveling
at 30 times the speed of sound
how far would he have got
the answer is just half of one percent
he would be less than eight light days
to the alpha centauri system
so it is truly a staggering
distance there and we'll cover space
travel more seriously in a later session
of
the uh course but the stars shown
are hopelessly too big at that scale
you shouldn't be able to see them so
let's put them in a scale we can
understand
so if our sun is a a p
in cambridge and the alpha centauri
system
is a pea a nutmeg and a grain of salt
in swindon nearly 150 kilometers away
you can see that compared to the
diameters of the stars
the distance between them is absolutely
amazing
however it's very different with
galaxies
here's the three main spiral galaxies
uh in our local group just
to their distance is to scale so you can
see that the
milky way is about
17 18 diameters away from the
andromeda spiral and then we've got a
the large and small magellanic nearby us
but that's not all our galaxies in the
local group
there's uh about 50 all together
most uh a small dwarfs
through several spheroidal galaxies
are the sort of builders rather left
over from building the biggest galaxies
now what's the difference between a
galaxy group and a galaxy cluster
well it's it's a bit arbitrary it's uh
it's about 30 but it depends on the size
of the
uh galaxies with most of ours
most of our 50 galaxies are tiny ones
so they don't really count so we're
still a a
group of galaxies
whereas something like the virgo cluster
is very big probably up to 2
000 galaxies and as you can see
there are only a few uh
galaxy diameters away from each other
in some cases so it's not surprising
galaxies collide
and one of the best examples is the
antenna galaxy
so called because the two streams of
material
coming out from the colliding galaxies
and if we look at the centers of the
galaxies
we can see the nuclei the straw
coloured bright stars and stars
here there's the nuclei of these
two spiral galaxies but the spiral arms
are so distorted we can't make them out
anymore
the gravitational influence has
virtually destroyed them
and you've got massive star formation
going on here
you've got the dark clouds of gas and
dust
and so these galaxies
collide and it's a very slow process it
takes
billions of years for two galaxies to
pass by one another although we can see
it happen
in a computer just
as they collide and you can see the
streams of material
thrown out the stars being thrown out
so we will never see a galaxy collision
but we get
snapshots and this is probably what the
antenna galaxy looked like 900 million
years ago
the two galaxies were coming together
the the
spiral arms were starting to distort
closer still again the spiral arms
are more or less fizzled out in that
galaxy that's face on and you can see
the two nuclei getting closer and closer
and this is probably
what the antenna looked like 600 million
years ago
but of course galaxies can pass right
through each other and the picture on
the left
you can see that the nucleus of the
spiral galaxy
but the spiral arms have totally been
destroyed by this galaxy as it passes
through and this one is called the
cartwheel galaxy
and it looks as though it's uh
somebody's dropped of stone
in a pond and you've got a ripple
radiating out
and which of those two galaxies went
through it
well we have to seek the help of radio's
astronomers to find out which of those
galaxies
passed through the gartwell cartwheel
galaxy
and we find it's not the two any of the
two closer ones
it's one off a little way off its
radio emissions can be tracked to that
uh galaxy further further away
but as galaxies come towards each other
they're captured gravitationally and
they can't escape
and grab gradually over billions of
years they'll pass
by or through each other and they'll
gradually
dampened out until they merge
and you can see the spiral
smaller spiral galaxy has caused
shells around the other galaxy each
time it's passed by sort of a fossil
record of what's happened
and once the two have merged you often
find
that there's shells around these
elliptical
galaxies and about 10 10
of all electrical galaxies have these
shells
and it is just like seaweed on
after a high tide successively lower
tide
leave rings of
seaweed again a record of
lower and lower tides
and the what's left is usually a
giant elliptical galaxy and this
giant elliptical in in the cluster
called abell
3827 is one of the universe's
largest galaxies and if we process
the image you can see that the the
what it had for breakfast the remains of
five
smaller galaxies
so when at the alpha at the centers
of large clusters you often have one or
two
giant ellipticals that have just gorged
themselves
on smaller galaxies however that's not
the biggest galaxy the biggest known
galaxy is ic 1101
and it's a monster i've put our local
group
under the same scale and you it would
quite happily swallow that lot and not
even notice
and it's about three times bigger than
the previous galaxy
so these galaxies can get enormous
we know from spectroscopy that
stars and galaxies can either be
approaching us or going away from us
because of the uh
fraunhofer lines on the on the spectrum
when the lines are moved towards the red
end
of the spectrum you find that the
star or galaxy is moving away from us
and of course
if the fraunhofer lines are moving
towards us
it's blue shifted and coming towards us
so we know from the spectrum that the
andromeda galaxy
is coming towards us at 300 kilometers
per second
the two magellanic clouds are going away
from us
and even the small spiral
galaxy the triangulum is coming towards
us as well
but in 2013 the gaia spacecraft
was launched which is accurately
measured
the positions of uh nearly two billion
stars and you can see
that's how many stars are in our milky
way and that's how many stars
gaia has measured so it's got a long way
to go yet
of course it's obviously not going to
measure all
the stars but it measures them so
accurately
it could even see stars in our
local group and
not not only can it measure them it can
measure the sideways
motion not the line of sight we can get
that from
spectroscopy but we could now get the
liar
the transverse motion and a group
from cambridge university here uh have
found that the large magellanic cloud
was
heavier than the small one
well it was sorry it was much more
heavier than they thought
and as it swept past the small
magellanic cloud
it's torn off a bridge of material
between them
so now we can understand what's going to
happen in the future
and first of all because the large
magellanic cloud
this uh smaller galaxy is much heavier
than we
imagined much more massive it's going to
stop
receding from us and then come towards
us
and in about two and a half billion
years
it will merge with us by then we will be
well on our way
towards meeting andromeda which is also
coming towards us
but there's not going to be a head-on
collision
they're going to sweep past each other
about four and a half billion years time
and then they'll be gravitationally
captured
and then they'll come together passing
through each other and
eventually forming a a giant elliptical
galaxy
in about six billion years time at one
stage we thought the
triangulum galaxy was going to join the
train wreck but it seems to be orbiting
well away out of trouble and you could
see
that it will probably go round and it
may spiral
in and eventually uh
the this giant elliptical and of course
here's a
computer simulation just showing the
capture
and you can see the triangular galaxy
sailing by
getting a very good view of the
interaction between the two
now while astronomers were looking at
these gas clouds and stars
they noticed that some of them were
spiral
in structure this was discovered in the
1840s when lord ross's telescope
with a much bigger mirror than anybody
else's
could saw the spiral structure
of these gas clouds as he thought they
were
and i think he's made a pretty
reasonable job because it's not easy
to see although the scar skies would
have been very much
darker there and he you can see the two
attempts
compared to a modern negative photograph
of the same galaxy
now there was a a great debate over
whether the spiral nebulae were in our
galaxy or was separate
and in the end they decided to
hold a meeting to sort it out
once and for all it was at the
smithsonian museum of natural history
just over a hundred years ago and
shapley was arguing that spiral nebulae
were gas clouds inside our galaxy which
meant a small
universe and kurt while curtis
said that spiral nebulae were separate
galaxies or island universes a
humongous universe and
curtis proposed that something like the
andromeda
galaxy would be half a million years
half a million light years away and most
astronomers wouldn't accept that
distance
they preferred to side with shapley
part of his evidence was that adrian van
maanen had
got two photographs of the
northern pinwheel galaxy taken many
years apart
and he could see that gas clouds
were moving in it so if gaff clouds were
moving
it must therefore be
something very close to us if we can see
the movement over
several years in the end nobody won the
argument
and it was last left to hubble to sort
things out
a few years ago and he
was using the fairly new 100 inch
telescope
the largest telescope in the world at
that stage
and almost the identical size
of the hubble space telescope
and he took numerous pictures of
the andromeda spiral now you can see in
one of the original plates in the
centrifuge
uh in the center picture and it's a
negative
so the bright nucleus of the galaxy is
the splodge in the middle
and he's he photographed them several
times he could see
individual stars but it took a lot of
effort
often they were nine hour exposures
taken over
two nights and he would be
guiding continuously for that nine hours
keeping a star on a cross on crosshairs
and it's a mind-numbingly boring job
i've done it i've done it for 10 minutes
and i thought i'd done it for half an
hour
it's not a good job but he did it for
hour after hour
amazing anyway he saw that some stars
flared up and he classed these as novi
they're not as bright as a supernova
but one novi faded and then
reappeared so he realized that it wasn't
a nova
and as you can see is marked with red
pen that it was a variable star
so he could take take many uh
exposures over the uh weeks
and he managed to plot out a curve
a light curve for some of these stars
and it turns out that they're cepheid
variable stars
stars that pulsate on a regular uh
basis and we know them from nearby
so he could work out the distance of
these
very faint stars in andromeda and he by
by their period and so
he worked out that the uh according to
the brightness of these seafood variable
stars
the distance to the uh andromeda galaxy
was about one million light years we now
know it's closer to two and a half
million
light years but in those days that this
they weren't even happy with half a
million light years but
he worked out that he was a million
light years away
and he wrote to curtis
uh shapley rather and
sent him uh
diagram and poor old
shapley that was a hell of a
bombshell
to come to as you can see somebody
walked into his office and he waved this
letter at them and said here's a letter
that's destroyed my universe
but uh
hubble would drop another bombshell six
years later
when he the distances were even bigger
and he found out about the expanding
universe but
uh jonathan will tell you all about that
next week
once the it was realized that these
faints nebulae were actually island
universes
they started to identify them and
we've got spirals ellipticals
irregulars galaxies
barred spirals and of course that our
old friends the giant
elliptical galaxies usually found in the
centers of
galaxies and dwarf galaxies
then later strange galaxies started to
be
found like seafood galaxies which
had very bright nuclei
and about 10 of uh all
galaxies spiral galaxies uh
are safer galaxies got very bright
centers
and then quasars were found these are
is short for quasi quasi-stellar object
but they were
shortened down to quasars which have a
very bright
and practical and outshine the rest of
the galaxy they're in
and then blazars are even brighter still
so what are these curious things
well we've got an artist's impression of
a supermassive
black hole and this would be in the
center of a galaxy
now this is the the stuff swirling round
the black hole
is material a torus of material
spiraling down into the supermassive
black hole
and all it is imagine this in
the center of a galaxy and you look at
the galaxy obliquely
you'd see it had a bright center and
this would be
a seafoot galaxy look down on it more
directly
and you'd see the brighter emissions
from these relativistic jets that squirt
out of black holes
and the blazer is just simply looking
down the barrel of a gun
of this supermassive black hole
and supermassive black holes were first
proposed
50 years ago by two astronomers here at
the
uh the cambridge at the institute of
astronomy
and they said that there should be a
supermassive black hole at the center of
the milky way
they didn't have long to wait again
radio astronomers came to the rescue
they found the supermassive black hole
in the constellation
of sagittarius and it's right where that
red smudge is and it was substance of
the
the the supermassive black hole was
subsequently called sagittarius a
star
but the trouble with uh galaxies
especially uh spiral galaxies
is there's a lot of dust and gas
in some of them but that's inhibits our
view
of the nucleus again in this
left-hand picture we can see where the
nucleus is
but we can't see it for the obscuring
gas and dust
it's just like on a foggy night street
lights are
quickly extinguished by the fogginess
and the bottom picture again shows
the center of our galaxy in the
sagittarius direction
and you can see there's more gas and
dust
obscuring our view however
astronomers have a trick up their
sleeves the top two pictures
are of the same area of sky in the eagle
nebula photographed by
the hubble space telescope one invisible
light
and one in infrared light and you can
see the infrared light
is seeing through the gas and dust
at the more distant stars beyond
and it so happens we there are certain
frequencies of um
infrared that are not absorbed by the
water vapor
in our atmosphere and telescopes
earth-based telescopes
can use these little tiny windows
to make infrared observations
uh this is the keck telescopes
they're the one of the largest
telescopes in the world or two of the
largest telescopes in the world
often they work together
and one of them over a period of time
imaged the stars close to the
supermassive black hole in our galaxy
and was able to map out the orbits
over the period of years taking many
pictures and when you get
two good orbits going around another
object
you can work out its mass
and over on the other picture you could
see i've
put these two stars
and the orange circle is
the size of neptune's orbit
super superimposed where the
milky way's supermassive black hole
is and you could and the
s two they call all stars that orbit
round
sagittarius a star is s2
and one of them got sorry called
s stars and s2 got very close indeed
you can see sort about four times the
neptune sun distance and by that time
when it passed
by the supermassive black hole in 2018
it had been accelerated up to two and a
half
percent the speed of light which is
amazingly
speedy
so once we've worked out the mass of
our black hole it's just uh 4.3
million solar masses
and we can work out the size of it but
the trouble is a
black hole by its very nature is just
like a singularity
what we tend to measure is the event
horizon
this is the boundary at which
light cannot escape
if it's inside this boundary the
gravitational
pull from the supermassive black hole or
even any black hole
will stop light escaping so that's the
boundary you do not want to cross
and the the uh
event horizon of uh sagittarius a star
is about 20 times the diameter of the
sun
so it's it's piffling and small
but the effects that this has
uh are enormous
what's the milky way a quasar well yes
once the supermassive black hole had
uh formed and any material around it
would have been uh drawn into it
and it would have become a quasar so
while
a black hole is feeding that's when it
could be
a quasar and this could last just a few
million years
or it can carry on for hundreds or even
thousands
of millions of years it's just while
there's a supply
of uh material spiraling into the black
hole
we don't know how long the milky way was
the quasar
but it's certainly uh the
sagittarius aids star is not active at
the moment
however we know it has had a a good meal
in the not too distant past because the
fermi gamma rays space telescope
launched in 2008
uh took an all-star i took an all-sky
survey of the uh
of milky way which is the band of stars
going across
the across the picture
and you could see two orange shaped
spheres
and these are known as fermi bubbles
these are
gas and cosmic rays and magnetic fields
and these are a a record
of when our
black hole last had a a decent meal
it was about five or six million years
ago and it probably
uh gorged itself for about half a
million years
on about 100 maybe 200 solar masses
during that period so
the nucleus was very active in those
in that period
but the milky way has had a couple of
little stacks
in 2002 a gas cloud was seen
to be heading towards the
black hole and a
computer simulation so showed that
the gas cloud labeled g2
all gas clouds orbit the
sagittarius a star uh given her g number
and this gas cloud g2 would sweep by
but some material would be drawn off
the gas cloud by the black hole's
enormous gravitational pull so it would
lose some material
so astronomers prepared diagrams for the
media
they sat down drew up their chairs to
watch the fun
but nothing happened the gas cloud
swept by the supermassive black hole
and nothing was sucked into into the
black hole
they realized that maybe they had
miscalculated the mass
of the black of the gas cloud and it was
much
heavier than they thought so the gas
cloud was able
to sweep by
there was another little snack in 2013
this one was spotted by the chandra
x-ray observatory you can see a steady
blue image that's just a magnetar
in the line of sight a neutron star with
a strong magnetic field that's nothing
to do with the uh supermassive black
hole but
it just you can see the flare it's
repeated
and that was something like uh probably
an
asteroid being swallowed
by our black hole
and there was also another little a
smaller flare
uh a year later so maybe the asteroid
had broken into two
or there was a second asteroid that
got too close
a couple of years ago there was another
little meal and this was photographed by
the keck telescopes again
and you could see the image repeated
as very bright there we go over several
hours of
these uh supermassive black hole
eating something and the possibilities
were
was it a another asteroid eaton
two uh uh the s star
number two that we saw passed by in uh
2018 and there it is you can see it's
not very far away
it got very close in 2018 maybe some
material was pulled off it
and went spiraling down into the
black hole and it it took uh
a year or two to get there
the other option was that it was
some of that gas cloud eventually
did get pulled off
and it took five years before it
spiraled down into the black hole
and most astronomers go with the g2
object and they've now found out
why this gas cloud is
heavier than they thought more massive
it's like a cocoon
and it contains a star so that's where
the mass comes from the extra mass
come from they hadn't anticipated
there's a star
shielded from our view by this cocoon of
material
around it
and last summer they found five
more s stars orbiting round but one
and two of them are squeeze our
candidates
and they uh i've labeled in red and i've
also put them
on the diagram with the other two stars
and you could see
s-4714
went inside neptune's orbit i know
neptune's not there it's just to show
the scale but it shows it got awfully
close
to our supermassive black hole and these
two objects
are squeeze ours or candidates are
squeezing them
put that over there
[Music]
well squeezers are stars that pass close
by
a black hole and they get
squashed or squeezed by the
gravitational effects of the black hole
and as they all bit away because they're
often in very elliptical orbits
they return back to uh
spherical shape but the trouble is when
they're
getting this close to black holes
this the physics of newton
don't apply you have to use the physics
of
uh einstein and
instead of orbiting around
it now spirals in so these two stars
as they pass around the supermassive
black hole
are going to get closer and closer
and the s4714
got so close is it it was accelerated to
up to 8 the speed of light
making it the fastest known star
so astronomers are going to keep an eye
on these two
and see what happens to them as they get
closer
and closer
but we we live in a spiral galaxy and
it'd be nice to know
how spiral arms form
and these uh
spiral arms uh have a couple of theories
that
are popular at the moment one is that
they're
long-lived density waves or
the other is there a short-lived
effect stirred up by an another passing
galaxy
this is uh messier 101
the northern pinwheel galaxy and these
uh density waves could be considered as
more of an effect
a bit like a traffic jam here we see
cars they come along and they slow down
at a road traffic accident looking for
blood and bodies
and then they speed off so the
traffic jam is there but it's not
the same scars all the time and it's the
same with the spiral arms
the stars pass through the density wave
and this could be shown here
so you'd have giant molecular clouds
catching up with the trailing edge of
the spiral arm
then they get squished in the density
wave
and this would trigger star formation
and then younger stars would form and
leave
the spiral arm the leading edge
as they orbit away from it
so the pinwheel galaxy is
considered a density wave galaxy because
there was
excellent evidence found in 2 uh
2016 really strong evidence that pointed
to
that and other galaxies were density
wave galaxies
but this galaxy messier 81
is close enough for the hubble space
telescope to see
individual stars and clusters
so it took a lot of hertzspun russell
diagrams
of regions all over this galaxy
expecting to find younger stars
in the in the spiral arms and older
stars
in the uh in between or
just having left the smile arm
but they found nothing
so this one this galaxy doesn't appear
to be
a density wave galaxy however
not very far away is m82
which this and another galaxy passed by
m81 a few hundred million years ago
and stirred up and you can see here in
this computer simulation
the red galaxy passes the galaxy
another galaxy and the
spiral arms are formed by the
interaction
as they whizz by so there are at least
two ways of spiral arms
that the way spiral arms can be formed
there may be others we don't know yet
but we live in a barn spiral galaxy
and you can see that the
red circle is the an orbit of
the stars around the conventional galaxy
but a density wave can cause
the orbits to become unstable
and slowly over millions of years
they'll deviate and eventually they'll
become
locked causing this
bar in our in our galaxy
here's the southern pinwheel galaxy
and about two-thirds of all spiral
galaxies
are barred and the the
bar funnels gas and material
in towards the nucleus and the the
supermassive black holes
in their galaxies and
you can see it's very active that uh
galaxy the bright nucleus is very bright
but it's suspected that the bars
are cosmically short-lived
while we can see the bars on the face on
galaxy
can we tell if the galaxy is edge on
them we're looking at the sideways at
its spiral arms can we tell if it's a
bad spiral the answer is
yes if you look at the nucleus it's got
this peanut shaped
peanut shape and when the paper came out
in 1994 in the title it had a pedo
in a bar it didn't take long for the
press
to label this the the independence soon
came up
with the snickers hypothesis a peanut in
every bar
so how does a the bar
form this nucleus well as
it goes round it flexes or buckles
and as it does so it smears out the such
stars and material into
this peanut shape and if we can
look at this says the top galaxy you can
look at the nucleus
and you can almost see it's x-shaped
it's so
so this is a barred spiral in the galaxy
on the right again another
fine peanut shape
and in 2013 the
telescope medium-sized telescope in the
european southern observatory
discovered that we had got a peanut
shaped nucleus as well so
that confirms the bar
in our galaxy right that's me done i'm
just
coming up to eight o'clock so i'll just
finish
with four more facts for you to remember
and that's when two galaxies collide
it's unlikely that two stars will
ever hit the distances between the stars
is so vast that they'll just pass
through each other
they'll have a dramatic effect
gravitationally
but if you're wondering how many grains
of rice there are in a kilogram bag of
rice says
50 000 i know i've counted them
but the trouble is of living inside our
milky way
we know it's very difficult to determine
the shape and size
the number of uh
stars without any great accuracy so
we don't even know the the the correct
shape of our bar
and that's for the number of stars i
said you could be counting it for 44
years
but there's so much uncertainty that you
could be counting it for only 22 years
or 88 years that's the range of
uncertainty of how many stars
there are in our galaxy and finally
the average density of the interstellar
space
is about one atom per cubic centimeter
that's
a very small dust particle every cubic
meter
of course it will be less in between the
spiral arms
and more in the spiral arms and even
greater density in
molecular clouds and